Good afternoon Maria. Hello. Hello, my name is Shea Buckley. I used to teach and was a
teacher at Mary Macklet School. So I'm a volunteer doing some of the interviews and so it's a
pleasure and an honour to interview you as the niece of Paul Sartori.
We have a set of questions that people ask but we don't necessarily stick to them. Wherever
you go, if we find that far more interesting then we'll stick with that and carry on with
whatever you're saying. Okay. Yes. So for the sake of the tape and everything I have
to ask you the thing. So could you give the tape your full name?
Maria Bridget Ann Sartori.
Right and we have permission to record this interview?
Yes.
Right then another question in this. Where and when were you born?
The 9th of September 1960.
Now we can get on to the far more interesting things. Could you talk about first of all
your early meetings with Paul Sartori?
One of my early memories of Paul.
Yes.
Well my earliest memory, we were living in Trinsara near Llanelli and there were three
young, there were six of us eventually but in the beginning there were just three children
living in Trinsara and I remember the excitement of seeing young Uncle Paul coming to visit
us and he would do magic tricks. He'd have a coin in his hand and then he would make
it appear from, as if it was coming from out of his ear. We were all on squeals of delight.
It would have been about seven, seven years old then. And another thing he'd do was, I
remember having a fear of spiders.
Right.
What he'd do was, he'd move some furniture and he'd make it his business to find a spider
somehow and he'd pick it up and he'd take his jacket off and roll his sleeve up and
leave the spider crawl up his hairy arm. We were horrified. Horrified.
Yeah.
He took the fear out of...
Of spider fear.
He took the fear away from me and my younger brother and sister.
Right.
And he was also very funny. We couldn't wait to see him.
What am I having earlier memories?
So he was very good with children then?
He could stop them at once.
Right.
Just pause, because I've got this written down.
Okay.
If you can find something to put into here, Maria, that's fine. What I'll do is I'll turn
this up on the recording and then maybe you can have a headphone so it'll be a bit louder
for you. Try that, see how you get on. Because I can cut all this out, it's not a problem.
See how you feel. Is that a bit louder for you?
Yeah.
Maria, is it okay if you just say hello or something, just to see if Shay can hear you
a little bit clearer?
Hello?
Hello. That's fine. That's very good. Thank you.
So you said you've written a lot of stuff down, so I'll let you get on with that. And
if you don't mind then, if there's anything I find that's really interesting, I'll maybe
ask you a few questions as you're going on with whatever you've written.
Okay. Those are the early memories I've got.
Right.
And then there's a gasp then. So later memories of that, I would say I would be between the
ages of 12 to 18, before I passed away.
Right.
He would come and visit us. He'd get a phone call, he'd go down to see his mother, come
and visit his mother, then his sister, his mother Dominica, and his sister Mary who'd
been copying for him. And he'd get a phone call, he'd say, Paul's coming over, Uncle
Paul's coming to visit you. So the house would be the six children.
Right.
The house would be awash with excitement and trepidation for this marvelous uncle coming
to see us.
Right.
Anyway, he'd turn up, and the first of my men out the door would go with joy to see
him. And she would bring her sister, and she'd come over from across the road, Margaret.
Right.
Anyway, he'd grab onto us. You have to remember now this is in the late seventies and the
lamb chop side boats were in the stables of the seventies. And he grabbed onto us one
by one and rubbed it into our necks.
Right.
And we'd be screaming with delight. And he'd go this to my aunt, and she'd be screaming,
Oh Paul, oh Paul, stop it, stop it.
Right.
But wanting him to carry on even more. And then he'd throw us onto the floor and tickle
us pretending that he was playing the piano.
Right.
And we'd be laughing so much, it was a tone to pee out.
The marvelous memories of him.
Yeah.
And we think what else now? He'd bring nothing but happiness and laughter to our home. And
he'd settle down then, and have a whiskey with my dad, and they would spend the rest
of the afternoon talking.
Right.
And Paul was always full of ideas of how to make money.
And one I remember was, he said to my dad, I was in the room and he said, he said, I've
got a bloody good idea now though, and how those monks could make money on Gordy Island.
He said they should turn it into an offshore casino.
Right.
With no tax.
Well that was one that my dad agreed it would be good. And then he said I've got another
idea for us, because they've got lots of farmland, they should start making yoghurt.
Right.
With selling chocolate. They should sell yoghurt, come eat in Gordy.
Yeah.
And he, on a personal note, he liked eating snails.
Right.
And there's a certain way of talking of course, I've never tried that myself, but he was
particularly fond of them. And when my aunt and aunt Kurt were on their way home from
Italy and France, they stopped the car in France and they went into some of these gardens
and they were removing some stones and gathering these snails and putting them into capoware
boxes to bring back for Paul in Harmanford West.
Right.
And he started reading them so he could eat them.
All right. That's great stories. But yeah, we know.
Another thing he said, when, I'm referring to my notes, Paul's nickname was his, when
he, this is from what my dad told me, my dad's passed away now, now he died two years ago.
Right.
And he said that Paul's nickname in that family with the youngest of six children was the
Rooter. And the Rooter meaning, my grandmother would say, when he would come home from boarding
school with the Carmelite monks near Camargan or Llanondailo.
Yeah.
What are you doing now Paul? What are you looking for? Looking through all my carpets
and drawers.
Right.
What are you looking for? I'm looking for something new.
I'm looking for something new.
Right.
Anyway, another thing he'd do, my grandmother said was he would be forever taking things
apart. For example, he took apart a grandfather clock and a man-kill clock. But he would never
put them back again.
Right.
He put there the cafe with the beautiful jukebox, a 1950s jukebox.
And he got it in his head one day, he was going to take it apart. And he took it apart.
And that was the last time it was ever used.
Right.
In Sartorius Cafe.
In Swinsea.
In St. Ashley.
Oh, Clendley. Right.
Right.
I'm trying to think of a street, is it Stratley Street?
Anyway, in Sartorius Cafe, another very famous jukebox, which he ruined.
Right.
We'd never heard that story before.
He was also, I remember my dad telling me, when he was away in Bowdoin School as a carmelite monk and
something like that, you know, he was a natural actor.
Right.
We went to see him in my bed.
And he played three or four parms.
Right.
And he was the only pupil to do this.
And one of the parts, a small part, was he was one of the witches.
Right.
And he put, they were laughing at him, he didn't have to put it on a fox's nose.
He had the witch's nose.
And he would be stirring the party, sadly enjoyed it.
Right.
Anyway, my other memories of poor land were, do you want me to stop?
No, you carry on.
I carry on my six of memories of poor land.
This is perfect, Maria, you're doing a fab job.
You're in it, you're in it.
Okay, I've got memories when he was in the sanctum, it is a big leap forward now to when he was ill.
Yeah.
Because, and he was, they announced that he was ill to the day he died, it was only six weeks I think.
Right.
Or was it 12 weeks, correct me if I'm wrong, but it was, I wonder if it was different, I know it was very quick.
Yeah.
He was in the Santa Maria Hospital.
Yes.
The cure is the crumbling of the bones in his spine.
The cure that had been fixed it.
Right.
And consulted Dr. Anthony Jones and put him on new traction.
On his head, weight on his head, and they separated the vertebrae and they stopped him from being paralysed.
Right.
The person who was in was at part of his time in the Santa Maria in the Applands and so on.
And once a day I'd go there, it would be nice to see him with my daughter.
Yeah.
And he would always, my uncle Paul would always bring out trained qualities in different people.
I noticed that and he would put them up there at ease.
And he put me aside one day and he said to me, he put me aside one day and he said to me, Maria was the last person in the room.
He said, I don't want you ever to forget you're a lovely girl.
I haven't had to wear very much of the boy.
That means a lot to me.
Nobody's ever said that.
And he said, I tell you something, I've cooked the best egg and chips as well.
And I remember one day my dad saying, Paul's hungry.
Cook him something.
I said, there's nothing in the fridge.
And he said, there's an egg there, yes.
There's a shot of a kid who's making egg and chips.
I said, there's an egg there.
And he said, you have a nice egg and chips, Maria.
Subsequently, in the last year, when I was abroad on holiday with my old family, my seven-year-old son Paul, we'd go to expensive Italian restaurants.
I'm always an Italian man.
Right.
I became a rabbi of the.
Paul, my son Paul, the only meal he would eat in these restaurants, have a dad, because he was.
Egg and chips.
And to this very day, that's his favorite meal, egg and chips.
Did you name your son after your uncle?
I think, yes, I did.
Oh, that's lovely.
And when I ran my grandmother, you're bringing tears to my eyes, I ran my grandmother to ask her what she might be calling my son Paul.
And she said to me, I would be all that.
Oh, Maria, I wish I was with you to give you a hug.
That's lovely.
That's beautiful.
He also said one other thing on his day.
The day before he died, one other thing.
It's very important for you youngsters to vote a mass, Sunday mass.
Even if Sweeney Todd was saying it, even if Sweeney Todd and Fred were saying it, I would still vote.
I don't know if you should have a story about when he replaced his dog, Paula.
Inside of a cigarette packet, he was in a funeral.
And his mother came along and he spoke to his mother and he said, oh dear God, she's come in and got my dog calling.
He opened his packet of cigarettes, somebody gave him a packet of cigarettes, he took all the farts out.
And he put the inside of the packet of farts there as the dogs call her and she didn't know the difference.
That's amazing.
There's another thing, he was a great athlete, I've got written down here.
He was selected, he could have run for, done a long jump for Wales.
And eventually, at long distance running, he could have run for the United Kingdom.
But all he wanted to do, he told my dad when he was 18, was he wanted to be a priest.
And my father said to him, all the girls are after you Paul, all the girls love you.
Can't you wait a few years?
And he said to my dad, no, you've got no idea.
The love I've got for our Lord is so overwhelming.
I just want to be with him every minute of the day.
I love him more than any girl I could ever think of.
He said I love him so much and that is what I want to do for the rest of my life.
That's my story, complete, completed.
That's absolutely amazing, that was fabulous.
My mum stopped to talk like that.
No, that's alright, it would have been wrong.
Is that ok? I'm feeling a bit giddy now, do you mind if I have a sip of tea?
Of course, have a sip of tea.
I think we'll join you on that. Honestly, that was beautiful.
Me and Shea have been very honoured to talk to so many people that knew Father Paul.
We've also got to know people that knew your dad and your uncle, Anthony.
We spoke to a chap, forgive me, I am shocked with names.
He was a friend, I believe, either of your dad or Anthony's.
I want to say your dad, but I'm not sure.
They went to school together.
He told us about this story about your uncle taking all of his classmates up to your nana's house
and feeding them.
I haven't heard that story.
The head teacher didn't want to tell him off,
but he wasn't really supposed to take all of his classmates out of school.
She had to write a note to your nanny and grandad and say,
can you tell him what he did was wrong but his heart was in the right place?
So just like you saying all of that about him being the router,
I was like, that fits actually, that really does.
Yeah, yeah.
My cousin, Niko, told me one story.
He told me to tell him to tuck his laces out of his shoes to get to a camp.
What, no laces in his boots?
Oh bless.
Yeah, sorry, I get so excited because I feel like I kind of know him through people,
that I spend so much time talking about him.
But I'm only 26 so I never got the opportunity to meet him,
but just so many stories.
I can't wait for all of you to hear about it because I hope it does you as a family proud.
Thank you.
Listen, I have to go now.
I've got to get my band all done.
No problem.
Thank you so much for your time.